## 1. Free, not just for free: running, checking, changing and redistributing software

The key idea behind the free software movement is to give the ability to
the users of software - which is present in basically any electronic
device we use today - to have the freedom to run, study and change the
software, and to redistribute it in any way. The free software movement
appears officially in the 1980’s, as a reaction to the increasing
dominance of proprietary software. This dominance emerged in the late
60s, with the increasing production costs of ever more complex software.

In contrast to proprietary software, which maps to an industrial
competition environment protected by patent systems, the philosophy of
free software focuses on removing any restrictions from the use and
modifications of software, which are an obstacle to cooperation between
peers. It aims in that way at promoting the progress of technology with
the goal “to liberate everyone in cyberspace” (Stallman, 2006).

At this point, an important clarification and distinction between the
terms open source and free software should be made. Although they are
often used interchangeably and to a large point overlapping, open source
software licenses may put restrictions on the (re)use of software. On
“free” or “libre” software, such restrictions should not be
present(“free” is here not meant in the sense of “free beer”, but rather
in the sense of “free speech”). In order to overcome the debate, the
term free/libre open source software (FLOSS) has been proposed.
Nevertheless, it is the free software movement which appears as strongly
politicized and therefore closer to degrowth. As a contributor at the
*Chaos Communications Congress* (the biggest hackers congress in Europe
happening yearly in Germany) argued, the concept of open source was
pushed forward in order to include the emerging expansion of free
software “into the neo-liberal ideology and the capitalist economy”
([Prug
2007](https://events.ccc.de/congress/2007/Fahrplan/attachments/967_24c3.HackingIdeologies.OpenSource.a.capitalist.movement.pdf)).

The development of the free software movement is historically bound with
the vision of a world wide web (www, short web) as it was conceived by
its founder Tim-Berners Lee. Core of his philosophy is that the internet
as a platform provides freedom and agency to its users. Up to 1996, the
Internet was mostly indeed a place for sharing knowledge and
establishing communication, away from commercial interests - its’
commercial use was in fact forbidden. Nowadays it is difficult to avoid
commercial Internet: Google, Dropbox or Facebook are just a few examples
of corporations making business out of our data, documents and
relationships in the Internet. This delegation of agency (and often
ownership) to corporate “data silos” on the cloud is one of the main
threats to the movements’ vision of a free web.

At the same time, we are observing the emergence of new patterns of
production and consumption of technology. Social-technological
innovations, rather than pure technological innovations, seem to be the
dominant pattern of innovation. Code development and recombination
“factories”, such as the famous GitHub, have become social networks for
a global sharing of digital production. The **Sharing Economy** brings
new forms of relationships between producers and consumers, by
establishing a peer-to-peer mode of access to resources.

These developments do not pass without critique also from within the
free-software movement: GitHub is also a centralized commercial
platform, and the Sharing Economy has been to a large extent cooptated
by the for-profit interests and the controversial model of billion-worth
start-ups, such as AirBnb or Uber. This led several organizations
standing behind the idea of the **Sharing **Economy**, such as
[*OuiShare*](http://ouishare.net/en), to propose the alternate concept
of **Collaborative Economy** to distinguish initiatives based on
horizontal networks and participation of a community.

At the hardware level, FabLabs, Repair Cafés or Open Source Ecology are
engaged in a worldwide knowledge sharing: people involved share their
accumulated experiences while they engage in production and learn with
their local communities (of practice). Further there are initiatives
such as the fairphone or the fair mouse, which attempt to achieve more
ecological and fair means of production. In doing so they are revealing
how difficult it is, within the current political ecology of resource
extractivism, to actually achieve a fair and ecological production of
technological artefacts.
