2. Who is part of the movement, who are its protagonists, what do they do and why (social stratification, how and where are they organized; which groups, which alliances etc. are there; what are the strategies...)?

It is difficult to describe who is part of a movement that is so diffuse and embedded at different levels across other movements. Nevertheless, a few key figures and institutions are worth mentioning.

Richard Stallman, the GNU Project and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) are probably some of the most important actors in the genesis of free software as a movement. The GNU project was founded by Stallman in 1983 at the MIT, with the aim of developing tools and eventually building an operating system consisting exclusively of free software. In 1992, the only missing part in the operating system was the *kernel*. 

The release of the Linux kernel under a GNU Public License in 1992, provided the missing piece to the operating system. The Linux kernel provides an amazingly successful example of convergence of global efforts: the 10,239 lines of code of the Linux Kernel, originally released by the Finnish student Linus Torvalds in 1991, turn to over 18 million lines of source code protected as a commons by the GNU Public License. Its' success has been so immense that most of the internet, as well as a huge number consumer devices - from Android smartphones, to TomTom GPS - are built on top of the Linux Kernel. And because of the GPL Public License constraints, any piece of software built on top of it must also make their source code available. As a consequence, activity around GPL'd source code, be it non-profit or for profit, brings a contribution back to the global commons of source code and algorithms.

On the web, the W3C is a membership-based institution defining the standards for the web, while also promoting convergence of visions on what the web should look like. It is structured into multiple working groups, which are generally open for contributors to join.  The W3C aims at developing common protocols that promote the evolution of the world wide web and ensure its interoperability.

The dynamics and new cultures of collaboration brought by the free software movement extend also beyond software itself. With the source code and collective dynamics brought by the free software movement, the Wikipedia managed to bring the Encyclopedia Britannica out of business in a matter few years.


More recently, with the dissemination of initiatives around Open Source Ecology or the FabLabs, the social and resource aspects of technological infrastructure production became also a living topic. Michael Bauwens talks about the new wave of global thought and local production - knowledge is shared across all parts, while production is localized. He uses the example of a tractor, built with parts that can be built by anyone and which building schemes are available for general use. 

Community networks supported by wireless (open source) technology such as the Freifunk initiative contribute to a grassroots development of "mesh networks" and directly contribute to distribute ownership of internet infrastructure. The low cost Raspberry Pi, among other "smart devices" can then serve, for example by installing the "FreedomBox" software, for having an own cloud and server for as low as 30 €, consuming around 10 W and fitting in the palm of the hands.

We also experiencing a growing number of collectives worldwide working on recombining and further developing the existing free software into stacks that provide a more democratic access to services, shaped to needs and uses of the target communities. Even the EU seems to be concerned with the continuous trend of concentration of information on data silos hosted by corporations overseas (and certainly also with the privacy and state surveillance issues which *citizenfour* Edward Snowden exposed): in response, it is providing several hundred millions under the Horizon 2020 research and innovation program to support "collective awareness platforms for sustainability and social innovation" (CAPSSI). Far from being a top-down research project, the fund specifically recognises the contribution of hacker communities and grassroots movements and is putting major efforts in networking these actors in consortia to build pilot platforms. New alliances are being built on these frontiers of techno-social innovation. It remains to see what effect these new platforms will have in the praxis and culture of the social movements.
