## From software activists to technology creators: user and hacker communities interconnected in global networks

It is difficult to describe who is part of a movement that is so diffuse
and embedded at different levels across other movements. A few key
figures and institutions are nevertheless worth mentioning.

Richard Stallman, the *GNU *Project and the *Free Software Foundation
(FSF)* are probably some of the most important actors in the genesis of
free software as a movement. The *GNU* project was founded by Stallman
in 1983 at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), with the aim
of developing tools and eventually building an operating system
consisting exclusively of free software. In 1992, the only missing part
in the operating system was the **kernel**[^1]**. The release of the
Linux kernel under a GNU Public License (GPL) in 1992 provided the
missing piece to the operating system. The Linux kernel is an amazingly
successful example of a convergence of global efforts: the 10,239 lines
of code of the Linux Kernel, originally released by the Finnish student
Linus Torvalds in 1991, has expanded to over 18 million lines of source
code protected as a commons by the GPL. Its success has been immense:
most of the internet as it is today, as well as a huge number of
consumer devices - from smartphones running with Android to TomTom-GPS
in cars - are built on top of the Linux Kernel. Because of the GPL
constraints, any piece of software built with or from it must also make
its source code available. As a consequence, all activity around GPL
source code, be it non-profit or for profit, brings a contribution back
to the global commons of source code and algorithms.

The membership-based institution *World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)* is
defining standards for the web, while also promoting convergence of
visions on what the web should look like. It is structured into multiple
working groups, which are generally open for contributors to join. The
*W3C* aims at developing common protocols that promote the evolution of
the world wide web and at the same time at improving the conditions for
collaboration of different actors.

Community networks supported by wireless (open source) technology such
as the [*Freifunk*](https://freifunk.net/en/) initiative contribute to
the development of “mesh networks” on the grassroots level. At the same
time they directly contribute to distribut ownership of internet
infrastructure. The low costs of a Raspberry Pi (a single-board
computer) help to run a DIY cloud service (owncloud) on the own server,
while costing as little as 30 €, consuming around 10 Watts of power and
fitting into the palm of the hand. A growing number of collectives are
recombining and further developing existing free software into stacks
that provide a more democratic access to services, shaped to needs and
uses of the target communities. The [**IndieWeb
community**](https://indiewebcamp.com/)** **for example** aims at
providing “a people-focused alternative to the ‘corporate web’” by
developing simple standards and tools for a cooperation across different
platforms.

Even at the higher institutional level of the EU, concerns about the
continuous trend of concentration of information into services hosted by
corporations overseas and the global surveillance backdoors, exposed by
**citizenfour** Edward Snowden, have prompted action. In recent years
hundreds of millions of Euros have been released under the Horizon 2020
research and innovation program to support “collective awareness
platforms for sustainability and social innovation”. The fund
specifically recognises the contribution of hacker communities and
grassroots movements and looks favourably on consortia that include
actors from these communities.

[^1]:  The kernel (also called nucleus) is a computer program that
    constitutes the central core of a computer's operating system. It
    has complete control over everything that occurs in the system:
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel_(operating_system>) (Access:
    07/12/16)


