## Questioning technology by commonly owning it

Within the degrowth movement, technology, and especially digital
technology, is often taken as something to be reduced or removed as much
as possible from life and society. While demanding this, it is dismissed
the fact that we live in the age of digital communication, where digital
technology - even when not directly used - is already part of the life
of nearly every citizen in the world.

In this sense, not engaging and helping to shape the development of the
digital infrastructure simply means that someone else will do it for
you, with or without consent. Derrida’s “paradox of hospitality” points
to an interesting aspect here: the first violence a foreigner faces is
the obligation to ask for hospitality in the language of the host –
which is in contradiction to the idea of hospitality. This metaphor has
been applied to technology by [Claudio
Ciborra](http://patterns.wiki.transformap.co/view/welcome-visitors/jon.patterns.wiki.transformap.co/welcome-visitors/jon.patterns.wiki.transformap.co/resources/jon.patterns.wiki.transformap.co/federated-wiki-resources/kate.au.fedwikihappening.net/hospitality-journal/kate.au.fedwikihappening.net/first-violence-to-foreigners/frances.uk.fedwikihappening.net/hospitality-and-hostility-to-technology):
if the host is to absorb the technology successfully, he must learn to
speak in its language and adopt the culture of the tool where
appropriate. In other words, if you don’t develop your own technology,
you will need to adapt to the language and patterns of the technology
someone else developed - maybe in contradiction to your cultural values.

The complexity of the industrial-technological complex is today
supported by large institutions and corporations. These progressively
distance their users from the technological choices and agency, from the
infrastructure that hosts it, the processes of technological production,
and of the resource extraction necessary for its maintenance. Increasing
centralization prohibits digital and analogue networks. Media theorist
Douglas Rushkoff shows that the century we are living in is no longer
shaped by the mechanical, huge, 19th century factory, but rather by
brands, titans of the digital world, which establish their monopolies
with socially networked platforms. These he understands as a spike of a
late or new capitalism. Massive amounts of venture capitals are injected
into ideas emerging into the digital society, with the objective of
capturing as many users and data as possible, and eventually establish a
monopoly and universality in the service provision: no one should get a
ride if not on Uber, no one should find friends if not on Facebook, no
one should find a date if not on Tinder. Still Rushkoff, and along with
him a few other intellectuals, hackers and activists in the
collaborative economy, free software and commons movement, sees the
internet as having a distributive power without precedent in the history
of Humanity.

Nevertheless, the Internet is being increasingly reduced to the usage of
a few platforms, which most often act as isolated silos of information.
This is blocking the core of the decentralized web: the hyperlink. The
famous Iranian blogger Derakshan writes how he, after spending a few
years in prison (2008-2015), was confronted with the dominance of the
social networks and feared how these would make the hyperlink obsolete:

“The hyperlink was my currency six years ago. Stemming from the idea of
the hypertext, the hyperlink provided a diversity and decentralisation
that the real world lacked. The hyperlink represented the open,
interconnected spirit of the world wide web - a vision that started with
its inventor, Tim Berners-Lee. The hyperlink was a way to abandon
centralization - all the links, lines and hierarchies - and replace them
with something more distributed, a system of nodes and networks.”\
[Derakshan
](https://medium.com/matter/the-web-we-have-to-save-2eb1fe15a426#.bmlygr33c)[2015](https://medium.com/matter/the-web-we-have-to-save-2eb1fe15a426#.bmlygr33c)

The web with the hyperlink, represents in a way a tool in the digital
world to build an autonomous society as described by Castoriadis. The
current threats that the hyperlink faces, are therefore also threats to
the emergence of degrowth utopias.

Networks of learning

It is possible to draw parallels to Illich's concept of the “learning
webs” (Illich, 1970). In Deschooling Society, Ivan Illich argues that a
good education system should follow three purposes: to provide all that
want to learn with access to resources at any time in their lives; to
make it possible for all who want to share knowledge to find those who
want to learn it from them; and to create opportunities for those who
want to present an issue to the public to make their arguments known.
Illich develops an example of a decentralized scheme of learning: a
network of tapes. People would be provided with tape recorders and empty
tapes, which “would provide opportunity for free expression: literate
and illiterate alike could record, preserve, disseminate, and repeat
their opinions”. Reference services and other mechanisms for bringing
peers in exchange would facilitate access to the resources the student
is looking for. Illich's network of tapes as well as the Internet of
hyperlinks replaces the radical monopole over the hegemonic discourse
with a multiverse of narratives.

Up to now, research and praxis on degrowth has unfortunately brought too
little contribution in building up a coherent, critical vision on
different innovations and movements that are emerging on the digital
technology scene. On the contrary, there is often a distancing of the
actors of degrowth from taking part in the technological and cultural
developments of the digital age - as if diving in and getting busy with
it would be in contradiction with a meaning of life rooted on voluntary
simplicity and harmony with nature.

****
