4. Which proposals has this movement for the degrowth perspective? (What is missing, which problems are out of the picture, what is underestimated, what themes, questions, problems aren't discussed at all or in an insufficient way?) Which proposals can the degrowth perspective offer to the movement?

Addressing the accumulation and appropriation of big data (the new capital) by corporations and states, linked open data may contribute to a world of massively scaled small data hosted on a federated commons cloud. 

// TODO: Extend with definition and debate on centralized, decentralized and distributed networks: http://networkcultures.org/unlikeus/resources/articles/what-is-a-federated-network/ (from #6)

The technology for deploying such an infrastructure is available now and at the software level it is even open. But what institutional settings could support such a cloud infrastructure to be largely deployed and disseminated in order to overcome Facebook, Google or Dropbox? The focus on the technological development and a secondarization of the governance and politics of technological infrastructure may be one of the weakest aspects of the free and open source movement.

Nevertheless, even if open source software has meanwhile become the business of giants (Google is the major example, but even Microsoft, an epic opposer of open source software, has now hundreds of open source projects in development), these issues are being targeted by movements associated to and emerging from the free software culture. More recently, with the dissemination of initiatives around Open Source Ecology or the FabLabs, the resource aspect has been approached. Bauwens talks about the new wave of global thought and local production - knowledge is shared across all parts, while production is localized. He uses the example of a tractor, built with parts that can be built by anyone and which building schemes are available for general use. Community networks supported by wireless (open source) technology such as the Freifunk initiative contribute to a grassroots development of "mesh networks" and directly contribute to distribute ownership of internet infrastructure. The low cost Raspberry Pi, among other "smart devices" can then serve, for example by installing the "FreedomBox" software, for having an own cloud and server for as low as 30 €, consuming around 10 W and fitting in the palm of the hands.

The developments and new modes of production and consumption being pushed by the so-called Sharing Economy provide interesting insights into the degrowth debate. 

Maurie Cohen, addressing the issues of the Sharing Economy, recently wrote, "the antagonism between producers and consumers that is inherent in predominant systems of exchange frequently results in consumption in excess of genuine needs -- often through the use of tempting volume discounts and the manufacture of goods that become prematurely obsolete." As such, rather than completely dismissing the patterns of exchange of the sharing economy, Cohen argues that through the development of "reciprocal relationships, producer-consumer cooperatives could bring the intentions of production and consumption into closer alignment". The challenge would be to develop a "more efficacious sharing economy" capable of constraining the "expansion of mediated micro-entrepreneurship and serialized rental in favor of modes consistent with communitarian provisioning". Cohen speaks about Platform Cooperativism as an alternative and the debate and formation of a movement around this has just started.

Alvin Toffler, although not directly addressing the Sharing Economy, presents a critical view on what he sees as an emergence of „prosumers“. He argues that these might nevertheless contribute to generate new forms of capitalist exploitation, through the tendency towards generating unpaid labor, while keeping power and decision structures untouched (Ritzer and Jurgenson, 2010; Rogero, 2010). Bauwens (2006) and Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006), argue, however, that peer production which follows the distributed logic of P2P and CBPP may operate independently from the market logic or existing power structures.

The federated approach with decentralized networks may yet present another approach to build new forms of relations between producers and consumers (and/or prosumers). Although the current hype focuses mostly on distributed networks and especially the concept of distributed public ledgers automatically assuring the validity and trustfulness of transactions (such as the *blockchain*, which was invented and became famous in association with the *bitcoins*), there are several problems on this approach, ranging from the question of who develops those automatic algorithms (for whom? with which criteria?), to the issues of resource waste associated with increasingly complex cryptographies that are produced in the process using huge amounts of processor power (and therefore energy).

Engaging in collective and federated production processes is a challenge for the free software movement, and one where a lot of learning could come from a stronger interaction with the degrowth movement. In the TransforMap project, an initiative involving dozens of networks, NGOs and initiatives worldwide, efforts are being put into place to build up a federation of many maps for the alternative economies. Within this process it combines network and community building, agile development practices (scrum) with events such as mapping jams, hackathons or vocamps. All with the goal to develop a technological stack that is capable of providing meaning and use for the diversel of narratives and movements emerging as a response to the limits of growth and the current multiple crises.
