## Degrowth debates can help to critically guide social and technological developments

The main historical contributions of the free software movement have
probably been on the production of digital commons: source code, data,
information, algorithms, knowledge. In addition to it, a whole culture
of collaboration based on the ideas of freedom and autonomy developed,
as seen in the previously mentioned global collective efforts such as
the Wikipedia or the Linux Kernel.

The developments and new modes of production and consumption being
pushed by the so-called “Sharing Economy” also provide interesting
insights into the degrowth debate. Rather than completely dismissing the
patterns of exchange of the sharing economy because of their current
institutional framing, Maurie Cohen (2015) argues that “reciprocal
relationships, producer-consumer cooperatives could bring the intentions
of production and consumption into closer alignment”. The challenge
would be to develop a “more efficacious sharing economy” capable of
constraining the “expansion of mediated micro-entrepreneurship and
serialized rental in favour of modes consistent with communitarian
provisioning”. Cohen calls for *Platform Cooperativism *as an
alternative institutional setting for enabling these new patterns of
reciprocal relationships. Research on institutions and democratic
practices as present in the degrowth movement can give valuable insights
on how the Sharing Economy could be (re)designed.

This blurring of roles between producers and consumers, enabled by
technology, is at the core of the praxis of the Sharing Economy, and a
broad range of social businesses. It leads to the emergence of a new
type of economical agent, which the futurist Alvin Toffler called
“prosumers“. Critics have expressed concern that this dynamic may
contribute to the generation of new forms of capitalist exploitation by
generating unpaid labour, while keeping power and decision structures
untouched (Ritzer and Jurgenson, 2010; Rogero, 2010). Bauwens (2005) and
Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006), argue, however, that production which
follows the distributed logic of peer-to-peer and commons-based
peer-production may operate independently of a market logic or existing
power structures. Also here the degrowth movement could critically
engage in the debate and contribute to a systemic understanding of these
emerging pruduction and consumption patterns.

Another ongoing debate is on the optimal architecture for the
infrastructure and services being provided: should we have fully
distributed (peer-to-peer) or decentralized, federated and autonomously
controlled networks? Technologies that enable the construction of
divided networks (such as Blockchain) recently make headlines. A debate
discussing social and political questions which are arising with such
new networks are on the other hand largely missing. Approaches for a
global distributed system will necessarily need a global algorithm,
which defines criteria for allowed transactions or which creates a basis
of trust between crypto-anonymised users. But is it possible to reach a
“global consensus” for an automatized judgement of trust? Who decides
about the technology to be used? How is privacy assured? How can trust
between people be built if there is no institution or place where it can
be attached other than the algorithms placed in machines that take care
of their transactions?

Supporters of decentralization, such as the federated approach practised
by the *I*ndieweb**, argue for distributed processes, rather than
consensus. They rather trust in the creative powers of the people
involved, rather than in the automation of all transactions. Local or
thematically bound communities can localise, control and determine such
processes. On a technical level it than only needs minimal standards of
cooperation (interoperability) such as with the hyperlink.

These new processes and roles will beyond doubt have a great influence
on institutional settings – on a social as well as a technological
level. Debates within the Degrowth movement around democracy, autonomy,
institutions and technology can help to shape the still to be built
networks and platforms and the relations between them.

The [*TransforMap*](http://transformap.co/) project, an initiative
involving dozens of networks, NGOs and initiatives worldwide, is
building a federation of many maps of alternative economies. Within this
process it combines network and community building and agile management
practices, with events such as mapping jams, hackathons and vocamps. The
goal is to develop a technological stack and an associated social
process that is capable of providing meaning and use for the diverse
narratives and movements emerging as a response to the limits of growth
and current multiple crises.

****
